New canine model card (#38631)
huggingface/transformers: docs/source/en/model_doc/canine.md

    </div>
</div>

# CANINE

[CANINE](https://huggingface.co/papers/2103.06874) is a tokenization-free Transformer — it skips the usual step of splitting text into subwords or wordpieces and instead processes text character by character. That means it works directly with raw Unicode, making it especially useful for languages with complex or inconsistent tokenization rules, or even noisy inputs like typos. Since working with characters means handling longer sequences, CANINE uses a smart trick: it compresses the input early on (called downsampling) so the Transformer doesn’t have to process every character individually. This keeps things fast and efficient.

You can find all the original CANINE checkpoints under the [Google](https://huggingface.co/google?search_models=canine) organisation.

> [!TIP]
> Click on the CANINE models in the right sidebar for more examples of how to apply CANINE to different language tasks.

The example below demonstrates how to generate embeddings with [`Pipeline`], [`AutoModel`], and from the command line.

<hfoptions id="usage">
<hfoption id="Pipeline">

> ```py

Reviewer: Simplify it to something like this:

```py
import torch
from transformers import pipeline

pipeline = pipeline(
    task="feature-extraction",
    model="google/canine-c",
    device=0
)
pipeline("Plant create energy through a process known as photosynthesis.")
```

import torch
from transformers import pipeline

extractor = pipeline(
    task="feature-extraction",
    model="google/canine-c",
    tokenizer="google/canine-c",
    device=0,               
)

text = "Hello World!"
embeddings = extractor(text)
```

</hfoption>
<hfoption id="AutoModel">

```py
import torch
from transformers import AutoModel

model = AutoModel.from_pretrained("google/canine-c")

text = "Hello World!"
input_ids = torch.tensor([[ord(char) for char in text]])

outputs = model(input_ids)  
pooled_output = outputs.pooler_output
sequence_output = outputs.last_hidden_state
```

</hfoption>
<hfoption id="transformers CLI">

```bash

> echo -e "Hello World!" | transformers-cli run \
>   --task feature-extraction \
>   --model google/canine-c \
>   --device 0

Reviewer: ```suggestion
echo -e "Plant create energy through a process known as photosynthesis." | transformers-cli run --task feature-extraction --model google/canine-c --device 0
```

```

</hfoption>
</hfoptions>

## Notes

> - CANINE skips tokenization entirely — it works directly on raw characters, not subwords. You can use it with or without a tokenizer (e.g., CanineTokenizer is available if needed for consistency or padding).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- CANINE skips tokenization entirely — it works directly on raw characters, not subwords. You can use it with or without a tokenizer. For batched inference and training, it is recommended to use the tokenizer to pad and truncate all sequences to the same length.

    ```py
    from transformers import AutoTokenizer, AutoModel
    
    tokenizer = AutoTokenizer("google/canine-c")
    inputs = ["Life is like a box of chocolates.", "You never know what you gonna get."]
    encoding = tokenizer(inputs, padding="longest", truncation=True, return_tensors="pt")
    ```
```

> - The model supports sequences up to 2048 characters by default.
> - Classification can be done by placing a linear layer on top of the final hidden state of the special [CLS] token
>   (which has a predefined Unicode code point). For token classification tasks however, the downsampled sequence of
>   tokens needs to be upsampled again to match the length of the original character sequence (which is 2048). The
>   details for this can be found in the paper.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- CANINE is primarily designed to be fine-tuned on a downstream task. The pretrained model can be used for either masked language modeling or next sentence prediction.
```
